---
title: "Assessing opportunities and inequities in undergraduate ecological forecasting education"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-ecological-forecasting-education
excerpt: 'We collate resources for learning ecological forecasating at the undergraduate level and assess opportunities and inequities at three levels: online resources, US university courses on ecological forecasting, and US university courses on topics related to ecological forecasting. Finally, we provide recommendations for ways to move the discipline towards greater equity and inclusion in educational efforts.'
date: 2023-05-02
venue: 'Ecology and Evolution'
paperurl: 'http://amwillson.github.io/files/2023-ecological-forecasting-education.pdf'
citation: '<b>Willson, A. M.</b>, Gallo, H., Peters, J. A., Abeyta, A., Bueno Watts, N., Carey, C. C., Moore, T. N., Smies, G., Thomas, R. Q., Woelmer, W. M. & McLachlan, J. S. (2023). &quot;Assessing opportunities and inequities in undergraduate ecological forecasting education.&quot; <i>Ecol. Evol.</i> <b>13</b>:e10001.'
---

Conducting ecological research in a way that addresses complex, real-world problems requires a diverse, interdisciplinary and quantitatively trained ecology and environmental science workforce. This begins with equitably training students in ecology, interdisciplinary science, and quantitative skills at the undergraduate level. Understanding the current undergraduate curriculum landscape in ecology and environmental sciences allows for targeted interventions to improve equitable educational opportunities. Ecological forecasting is a sub-discipline of ecology with roots in interdisciplinary and quantitative science. We use ecological forecasting to show how ecology and environmental science undergraduate curriculum could be evaluated and ultimately restructured to address the needs of the 21st century workforce. To characterize the current state of ecological forecasting education, we compiled existing resources for teaching and learning ecological forecasting at three curriculum levels: online resources; US university courses on ecological forecasting; and US university courses on topics related to ecological forecasting. We found persistent patterns (1) in what topics are taught to US undergraduate students at each of the curriculum levels; and (2) in the accessibility of resources, in terms of course availability at higher education institutions in the United States. We developed and implemented programs to increase the accessibility and comprehensiveness of ecological forecasting undergraduate education, including initiatives to engage specifically with Native American undergraduates and online resources for learning quantitative concepts at the undergraduate level. Such steps enhance the capacity of ecological forecasting to be more inclusive to undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds and expose more students to quantitative training.