---
title: "Both environment and feedbacks are important drivers of macroscale forest, savanna, and prairie biome distributions in the Upper Midwest, USA"
collection: talks
type: "Contributed Presentation"
permalink: /talks/2024-2
venue: "American Geophysical Union Fall Meeting"
date: 2024-12-13
location: "Washington, D.C."
---

Macroscale environmental conditions explain spatiotemporal patterns in the distribution of vegetation communities and the biomes they comprise at broad scales. However, similar environmental conditions can support distinct communities in some regions. This is the case near the boundaries of savanna biomes with forest and prairie biomes, such as in the Upper Midwest, USA (UMW) during pre-industrial times, and in tropical Africa and South America today. In these regions, vegetation-environment feedbacks, such as the promotion of fire by open vegetation, drive the distribution of biomes and have important implications for the resilience of these biomes to changes in the environment. The spatiotemporal scales at which feedbacks are important for determining the distribution of biomes are disputed, however. Here, we used reconstructions of relative abundance of eleven tree taxa over 2,000 years and the UMW from fossil pollen records, along with reconstructions of climatic and soil conditions, to quantify the relationship between environment and vegetation. We found that the distribution of vegetation communities in the UMW is broadly explained by average annual temperature, total annual precipitation, precipitation seasonality, and soil texture. After accounting for their joint dependence on such environmental variables, however, strong residual relationships remained between taxa characteristic of the savanna-forest and savanna-prairie biome boundaries. Specifically, the strong negative residual correlations between oak (characteristic of savanna) and maple (characteristic of forest) taxa (-0.60 [-0.83, -0.43] mean [95% CI]) and between oak and elm (characteristic of prairie) taxa (-0.59 [-0.82, -0.42]) indicate that, under the same environmental conditions, savanna taxa remain systematically segregated from forest and prairie taxa. This suggests a potential role for vegetation-environment feedbacks in explaining the distribution of vegetation in this region, even at regional and millennial scales. This work highlights the importance of incorporating feedbacks into predictive models of the long-term and large-scale consequences of environmental change on savanna, forest, and prairie communities.